TODO

Implement a solver for vertical.qp, to avoid depending on the compiled
code in quadprog which I guess is not always available.

Define makeContent.dlgrob instead of drawDetails.dlgrob in R-3.0?
Grid test for text with descent inside polygon?
use makeContent instead of drawDetails, which would make it possible
to test rendered output using grid.force
https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2013/RJ-2013-035/RJ-2013-035.pdf

image labels: draw a grob on screen instead of assuming it is
text. Have a toggle for drawing images and/or text. Handle both in a
uniform way in Positioning Methods by just asking for the grob size
instead of the text size.

Get rid of dl.summarize and gapply.fun for simplicity?

method for .zoo plots?

handling custom densityplot params in lattice?

problems with plotting color labels in lattice when col= is specified,
see etc/individual.R, and gabor.R

see etc/xYplot.R for a problem with plotting some weird trellis
objects.

Maybe remove contour plot support/examples?
https://cloud.r-project.org/web/packages/isoband/vignettes/isoband3.html
does much better labels.

How to use geom_dl with stat_smooth? added vignette example based on
https://github.com/tdhock/directlabels/issues/24

Get dldoc working / web page updated with new pos methods.

How to figure out if user assigned aes(group)?  You can always deduce
if a group was explicitly assigned by seeing if the group column is
positive... The -1 is an indicator saying that everything
automatically belongs to the same group.  group and PANEL are the two
single columns that are enforced to always exist in the layer data and
is used extensively during the data preparation pipeline so it is
unlikely that we will make their presence optional.

rot parameter respected by polygons method?

2021.2.24

rgb to grayscale formula corrected in polygon.method().

2021.1.13

Remove bitmapType cairo in examples vignette.

2020.12.29

fix for single ggplot with two geom_dl with same method. previously
this would create two grobs with the same name in a single gTree,
which is not allowed (as documented in ?gTree) and resulted in only
the first geom_dl being drawn. Now we append a unique integer id to
each name so that grid draws both geom_dl.

fix for lattice: Get lattice transformation functions working again +
tests. (Error: data must have a column named label for qqmath
examples)

dldoc no longer uses type="cairo" at request of CRAN.

2020.6.30

custom.colors argument for polygon.method, default choice of white or
black depending on how dark the color would be if rendered as
grayscale.

2020.6.17

grid grobs have names.

vignette example / LOPART100 data for black/blue pos swapped for
t=100. (bug fix in make.tiebreaker, use rule=2 in approx for no NA)

using top.qp with one point gave an error: need at least two non-NA
values to interpolate. (bug fix in make.tiebreaker, only run approx if
there are at least two values)

legends2hide inside tryCatch to fix error with parsing legends in
ggplots with custom themes,
https://github.com/tdhock/directlabels/issues/6

fix test failures that showed up with new code.

examples vignette for geom_dl with same aes(label), but different
aes(label.group, color).

draw.polygons/polygon.method support top/bottom as well as
first/last/left/right. New *.polygons methods.

2020.6.7

initial code for:

polygons below the point.

aes(label) which may have the same value for two different aes(group)
values, e.g. two algorithms/groups which both compute the same thing,
optimal changepoint tau^*, but we want to compute and show a label for
each of them.

using stringDescent to compute height of boxes. maybe consider
grobDescent or descentDetails?

2020.1.31

remove Suggest ElemStatLearn.

remove prostate dl.combine example.

2019.12.5

update for new testing software.

2018.10.5

Non-syntactic variable names supported, e.g. aes(color=`car class`)

2018.5.22

Update Suggest dplyr to pass CRAN checks.

2017.03.31

test case and bugfix for lasso.labels with a constant line.

2017.03.24

test case and bugfix for using directlabels when ggplot2 is not
attached to the global namespace. this happens if directlabels is used
in a ggplot in a package that imports ggplot2 but does not attach it,
e.g. https://github.com/tdhock/penaltyLearning/blob/master/R/IntervalRegression.R

2017.01.03

Test and bugfix for angled.boxes -- there was some problem with the
colour column (one of the columns to.restore after applying
far.from.others.borders) being treated as a factor.

2016.10.25

delete browser() in qp.labels

2015.12.16

importFrom non-base packages.

2015.12.15

ggplot2 does not need to be installed for package checks to pass.

2015.12.14

suggest ggplot2 >= 2.0.

2015.11.28

Works with new ggplot2 >= 1.0.1.9003 internals. (and no longer works
with older ggplot2 internals!)

2015.6.17

Namespaces fixes to ensure that R CMD check runs cleanly, 
and that you can use `geom_dl()` 
without attaching directlabels to the search path.

2014.6.13

geom_dl(show_guide=FALSE) is default.

2014.5.12

custom colors for dotplots in lattice, see etc/lattice-custom-colors.R

2014.4.25

BUGFIX: bumpup works when there is only 1 group.

2014.1.31

use fill if no colour in ggplots.

guides(others_with_colour="none")

2014.1.27

polygon.methods for lineplots.

2013.11.21

projectionSeconds data set and angled.boxes Positioning Method,
inspired by Mark Schmidt's prettyPlot.
http://www.di.ens.fr/~mschmidt/Software/prettyPlot.html

draw.rects draws a rotated box when rot is specified.

2013.9.17

label.endpoints can handle the case (common for scatterplots) where
there are several endpoints with the same x value.

2013.8.2

geom_dl aes inherits from the colored geom aes.

2013.7.24

Doc updates: drawDetails.dlgrob documents interpretation of columns,
apply.method uses itemize list, \code{\link{fun}} hyperlinks.

2013.6.15

Documentation updates.

2013.6.14

Depend on quadprog.

Bugfix for reduce.cex.lr: decrease the text size based on previous
cex, rather than assuming the previous cex is 1.

Remove follow.points, perpendicular.(lines|grid).

Change with/within/transform/subset to alternatives that do not
generate NOTEs during package check.

2.10

Fixed: stat_contour(breaks=custom_breaks): From Doug Peterson: Side
point: Something else I noticed when playing with this - if any kind
of bin adjustment is used within the stat_contour (e.g.,
stat_contour(aes(colour=..level..), binwidth=50) directlabels ignores
the binned contour lines and labels everything (=whatever default
contour lines are produced, even if not plotted!). This should also
work for specifying custom # of bins in geom_bar.

data("quoted") for R-3.0 package checks.

4 Nov 2012 fix some doc typos.

2.9 --- 25 Sep 2012

Delete several examples to reduce timings.

2.8 --- 13-29 Aug 2012

Attempted submission to CRAN 25 Sept 2012.

top.points uses xlimits to avoid labels going off the left and right
sides.

draw.rects: use grid.polygon instead of grid.lines so we can fill the
box. set the column fill="transparent" if you don't want the
background.

empty.grid: only consider boxes for which the class of the closest
point is the target direct label. This avoids weird problems that can
happen on smaller plots, where sometimes labels would appear next to
another class.

qp.labels: reduce text size if there is not enough space to read all
the labels. You can still increase the xlim and ylim if you want to
labels to render at full size. This is the best fix I could think of
for the following long-standing issue:

how to automatically adjust axes to make direct labels immediately
legible? For multipanel plots you would have to adjust all the scales!

qp.labels: respect any predefined vjust for overlap calculation, by
calculating top and bottom before and using these in the QP.

qp.labels takes a new argument limits which specifies the lower limit
for the bottom of the first label and the upper limit of the top of
the last label.

API change: qp.labels takes a function order.labels instead of
tiebreak.

Bugfix: pass on ... args in dl.combine.

Bugfix: if only 1 row to call to qp.labels, then just return it.

Bugfix: calc.boxes does not use transform since that was ignoring the
cex specified.

2.7 --- 12 July 2012

New lasso.labels Positioning Method that applies the QP solver to both
the top and bottom labels.

New tiebreaker argument for qp.labels so we can do that for top.qp as
well.

2.6 --- 5 June 2012

In ggplot2 >= 0.9.1, layer$data is an empty list of class "waiver" in
the ggplot object, but geom_xxx(data=waiver) results in an error, so
we check for this now and use data=NULL when we find a waiver.

2.5 --- 6 April 2012

draw.rects with configurable color, default black.

bugfix for ggplot2 geom_line picker. before we were not actually
checking the number of levels of the groups.

bugfixes for scatterplots using perpendicular.grid and [ac]hull.grid.

new check.for.columns function to make sure the data.frames returned
by Positioning Functions in apply.method have the necessary info.

bugfix for apply.method restore invariant columns for each group after
applying Positioning Method algorithm.

2.4 --- 5 March 2012

Suggest nlme to avoid warning on pkg check.

require(proto) in geom_dl to avoid error if it is called without
direct.label.ggplot

2.3 --- 2 March 2012

In apply.method, we look at all groups and determine which columns are
invariant in each, then after the Positioning Function is applied, we
write these values to the resulting data.frame if it does not contain
these variables. That way each individual Positioning Method doesn't
have to worry about keeping track of all the weird annotation columns
that can be there on input.

Works with ggplot2 0.9.0, including new simplified hiding of the
legend, using guides(colour="none")

dlgrobs have names == GRID.dlgrob.method if method is a character
string.

Tiebreaking for qp.labels when we are doing lineplots.

2.2 bugfixes

ggplot2 autopicker simpler.

use aes_string instead of aes in direct.label.ggplot

2.1 31 August 2011 -- bugfixes

gapply can take positional arguments like gapply(d,subset,y==max(y))

melt is no longer used in top.bumptwice

2.0 29 August 2011

dl.move and static.labels allow specification of label positions in
terms of the displayed axes! Internally, they convert the
user-specified numbers to cm.

Figured out how to calculate label bounding boxes for ggplot2, by
returning dlgrobs from the draw() method of the new
GeomDirectLabel. The special drawDetails.dlgrob method is called
within the plotting viewport, so we can calculate the bounding boxes
of the text before they are drawn.

In fact all Positioning Methods which take into account visual
distance need to calculate visual distance instead of plotting
coordinate distance. ie smart.grid tries to find the label position
which is closest to the center, but this can be very skewed if x and y
axes are not on the same scale. This is now fixed since all
coordinates are converted to cm before being passed to Positioning
Methods.

fontface and fontfamily for direct labels are now supported even on
ggplot2, thanks to the new dlgrob backends! See example(dlcompare).

1.4

if(require(pkg)) in examples so you can see the rest even if you don't
have pkg

1.3

delete empty.grid.fun ... now to use empty.grid, do i.e.
list("get.means","empty.grid") 
for labels with target points at the means of each point cloud.

ignore.na Positioning Method for removing rows with NA x or y. This is
applied before all Positioning Methods in label.positions().

no longer depend on ggplot2/proto for further modularity.

gapply function for applying a Positioning Method to each group, also
eliminates need to depend on plyr.

dl.indep -> gapply.fun

eval.list -> apply.method 

path example datasets.

redo ggplot2 backend --- analyze layers to determine which has the
color.

Respect predefined scale_colour_manual() in ggplot2:
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3337765/can-i-use-direct-label-with-ggplots-scale-colour-manual
I tried to do a hack that looks into p$scales$.scales to turn off the
legend (r371), but that didn't work so well, so I went back to the
method of just adding a new scale_colour_discrete(legend=FALSE) (r382)
You could always set the scale_colour_manual AFTER the call to direct.label():
p <- ggplot(...)
p2 <- direct.label(p)
p2+scale_colour_manual(...,legend=FALSE)
As of r400 I do analysis of the layers of the ggplot object, and turn off
 the color legend off if there was one. Thus this should be equivalent:
p <- ggplot(...)+
  scale_colour_manual(...)
direct.label(p)

1.2 Positioning Function -> Positioning Method.

1.1 26 nov 2010 delete many examples so CRAN check completes quicker.

1.0 16 nov 2010 initial release attempted to CRAN -- too many examples.
